

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Check for<br>updates<br><!-- End of picture text -->

52 

T. Ingold 

This was in the early 1980s. At that time, Gibson’s work was virtually unknown in anthropology. I have found only one previous reference to it in anthropological literature, in an essay on “Cultural factors in spatial orientation,” penned in the 1950s by A. Irving Hallowell (1955: 184–202). One of the most prescient and original anthropologists of his day, Hallowell already sensed that Gibson’s ideas could help us ground cultural variation in immediate perceptual experience. But he was so far ahead of his time that his proposals fell on deaf ears and were not followed up. Knowing nothing of this, I was introduced to ecological psychology from quite another quarter. I had recently published an article (Ingold, 1983) addressing the problem of where to locate culture in the human–environment equation and had concluded that while human beings can draw on adaptive resources of both natural and cultural provenance, in varying proportions, the purpose that drives their activity, and gives meaning and value to what they do, is inherently _social_ . It is therefore essential, I insisted, to distinguish between the domain of social relations, as the crucible of agency, from the domain of nature-culture, which furnishes the instruments that allow this agency to be carried through into practice. 

By good fortune, Ed Reed, one of Gibson’s most brilliant but tragically shortlived disciples, came across my article and took the trouble to write to me.<sup>2</sup> In his letter, he pointed out that what I had said about the instrumental role of natural and cultural resources could be better expressed with the Gibsonian concept of affordance. For the human being at large in an environment, I would only have to say that the things encountered there, whether naturally present or culturally formed, afford openings along which social life can proceed, or alternatively, hindrances that block the way. Intrigued by this suggestion, I delved into the literature of ecological psychology and began attending the international conferences on “event perception and action,” which brought its practitioners together. All were united in their opposition to the premise, fundamental to mainstream cognitive psychology, that perception is the operation of a mind, encased in a body, in processing the data of raw sensation into final images or “percepts.” They would insist, to the contrary, that perception is the achievement of a whole living organism, indissolubly mind and body, actively engaged in its surroundings. As such, perception yields to no finalities, but _carries on_ , even as life does. Or as Gibson (1979: 253) put it, “perception … does not have an end. Perceiving goes on.” 

Nevertheless, despite their common allegiance to a Gibsonian program, I found ecological psychologists to be fiercely divided among themselves. The seeds of discord had indeed already been sown in Gibson’s seminal text, _The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception_ , in which he had simultaneously put forward two, apparently irreconcilable positions. One, which we could call “realist,” is that objects in the environment afford what they do because of what they are. Affordances, that is, are intrinsic properties of objects in themselves, regardless of whether any living being is there to realize them. They define a niche in the environment for a creature to fill; remove the creature, and the niche is still there. The other position, 

> 2 Reed’s (1988) study, _James J. Gibson and the Psychology of Perception_ , remains definitive. 

53 

6 Anthropological Affordances 

which we could call “relational,” is that affordances exist only insofar as they are realized in the activity of a creature for which, or for whom, they are of consequence. No creature; no affordance. Wanting it both ways, Gibson insisted that affordances are real, objective, and physical, even as they are properties of an environment that—in explicit _contrast_ to the physical world—is constituted only in relation to the being whose environment it is.<sup>3</sup> For me, this discord immediately rang a bell. Not only did it echo contradictions in my own thinking; it also pointed a way toward their resolution. 

# **6.2  What to Do About Culture** 

For as I now realize, I too had been trying to have it both ways, taking a realist stance with regard to matters of nature and culture, or objects and artifacts, but a relational stance with regard to the conduct of social life. In effect, I had divided the human being into two: the _person_ , constituted as an agentive subject by way of their involvement with others in an ever-unfolding field of social relations; and the _organism_ , adapting to a given environment through a suite of innate and acquired attributes. It was a position that could be upheld only by cutting out the domain of the social from the ecological domain of organism–environment interaction, and assigning to each a distinct ontological status. But as the tension between the two ontologies became unsustainable, it dawned on me that the human being is not dual but singular—that being an organism and being a person are one and the same. I would have, then, to extend the kind of relational thinking I had applied to human persons beyond their association with one another to include everything else that, at one time or another, would figure in their lives. What we had been used to calling social relations would thus be but a subfield of the wider field of environmental relations. 

My first attempt to think this through was published in 1992, in a paper entitled “Culture and the perception of the environment” (Ingold, 1992). Pitching my argument against both the constructionist view that culture provides a template for organizing the chaos of bodily sensation into meaningful representations and the adaptationist view that it endows its possessors with the knowledge and equipment they need to function in the material world, I suggested that a relational approach to affordances might give us a language in which to express how people continually bring forth environments, and environments people, that could escape the endless back and forth between nature and culture within which ecological anthropology had become trapped. In the language of affordances, people would be differentiated not by culture but by their variable attunement, through practiced skills of perception and action, to the features of a world that are ever brought forth into presence 

> 3 Spot the difference between this: “No animal could exist without an environment surrounding it. Equally … an environment implies an animal (or at least an organism) to be surrounded” (1979: 8), and this: “The organism depends on the environment for its life, but the environment does not depend on the organism for its existence” (1979: 129). 

54 

T. Ingold 

by way of their own activity. If nonhuman beings can enter into meaningful relations with the world without these relations having to be mediated by the concepts and categories of a cultural tradition, then, I argued, this must equally be true of humans. Culture, in short, doesn’t get in between people and their environments. Nothing is between. 

Indeed, somewhat overstating the case, I proposed that the best way to deal with the problem of what to do about culture is simply to eliminate it from the ecological equation, or to accord it at best a secondary role as a medium not of perception but of interpretation. We perceive as we go along; we interpret when, reflexively, we look back on what we and others have done, recalling it in memory, narrating it in stories, and evaluating it in judgments. Perhaps it is in their interpretative prowess, made possible by faculties of language and symbolism, that human beings, compared to other animals, truly come into their own. This, in turn, offered a solution to another longstanding anthropological conundrum. It lies in the problem of how we can come into a shared perception of the world, with people whose experiences of life have heretofore been very different from ours. Classically, understanding the people of another culture was regarded as a task of translation: an attempt to establish a cross-over between distinct conceptual worlds. To see things as other people do meant keying into their concepts. Yet how can you do this when, without having already understood the concepts, it is impossible to obtain the key? You would be caught in a vicious circle. 

Returning to this problem, a year after my initial foray into Gibson’s ecological approach to perception, the theory of affordances once again pointed toward an answer (Ingold, 1993). For if perception is not about organizing sensory data in terms of acquired concepts, but rather attends to what the world itself affords in the practical conduct of life, then to perceive the world as others do, we don’t have to get inside their heads. It is enough to join with them in their activities. All perception entails movement, and as Gibson (1979: 200) pointed out, since moving observers can be in the same place at different times, it requires no effort of conceptualization for them to share the same world. Perception, in other words, is carried on in public, rather than in the privacy of isolated minds. It requires only that we should participate with others, attend closely and carefully to what they are doing, and attune our movements with theirs. By doing so—that is, by practicing the method that anthropologists call “participant observation”—we bring forth an environment of affordances in common. This commonality lies, if you will, on the hither side of concepts: it precedes and facilitates, rather than depends upon, representation and interpretation. It is this, of course, that makes anthropological fieldwork possible. 

# **6.3  Affordance and Interpretation** 

In hindsight, however, I had perhaps been overhasty in expelling culture from the field of human–environment relations. My objection was not, after all, to the idea of culture as such, but to its association, in the anthropological canon, with a certain 

55 

6 Anthropological Affordances 

way of thinking about difference. It is a way that imagines a world divided between people of our own and other cultures, each locked into its particular frame of concepts and categories, or “worldview,” for organizing the data of experience. The theory of affordances, by contrast, leads us to see difference as emergent from within the nexus of our practical involvement with beings and things in the world around us, and in the variable skills of perception and action to which it gives rise. Thus if two companions, going along together, perceive things differently, it is not because they are bringing different mindsets to bear in organizing the same corpus of sensory data, but because they have been differentially attuned, through prior experience, to what the environment affords. And if culture is just another word for difference, of a kind that is not laid down in advance but develops in the course of the human life-cycle, then it is not unreasonable to regard the differences we have been used to calling cultural as variations on the theme of skill.<sup>4</sup> 

Yet for all that, the idea that in perception, life enters into a direct and unmediated relation with the world, even as the world opens up to its living inhabitants, has proved hard for many anthropologists to swallow. It is almost an article of faith, in anthropology, that things can never be perceived directly, but only by way of other things that stand for them. Or in a word, we perceive only _signs_ of things, not things themselves. There can be no meaning, in this view, without signification. Anthropology always wants to hide presence behind its representative signs, perception behind interpretation. The perspective of affordances, however, puts this into reverse. It asserts that we perceive things as they come forward into immediate presence and impinge on our activity, and not only by way of the signs they leave in their wake. Interpretation comes later. This idea of direct perception, however, has been widely misunderstood. It doesn’t mean that the world simply imprints itself on the mind like a foot in mud, to leave an indelible impression, or that there is some kind of mystical fusion between a being and its world. Rather, in Gibson’s understanding, perception takes work: it is the investigative peering, snooping, sniffing, rummaging, and fumbling that goes on as perceivers discover, in practice, what things afford. 

This, ultimately, is what sets the ecological approach to perception apart from an alternative that has gained much greater traction in recent anthropology. The source of this latter approach lies in the semiotics of Charles Sanders Peirce. For Peirce, perception is all about signs and their interpretation. Everything one might perceive—be it a trace, a likeness, a word<sup>5</sup> —is a sign of something else, yet what it stands for turns out to be a sign for something else again, and so on in an unending chain of signification in which the world seems to escape, like the end of the rainbow, as fast as the perceiver catches up with it. All life, in this view, is semiosis, a 

> 4 This argument is developed at length in several of the constituent essays of my book _The Perception of the Environment_ (Ingold, 2000). 

> 5 These correspond to the three kinds of signs, respectively indexical, iconic, and symbolic, which Peirce identified in his inquiry. 

56 

T. Ingold 

tracking of signs and their meanings.<sup>6</sup> At first glance, this Peircean understanding of perception has much in common with Gibson’s. There is the same pragmatic focus on actor-perceivers, at large in an environment, finding a way through, by sussing out the meanings of the things they encounter. But here’s the difference: for Gibson, meanings are affordances, not interpretations; and affordances are ways along which the world comes into presence, not the residual traces or indications of a world that has already vanished into absence or hidden from plain sight. Affordances are directly perceived, not represented or interpreted. 

But anthropologists, convinced that meaning requires signs, have been more concerned with extending sign processes to nonhuman worlds than considering the possibility that the perception of affordances, common to nonhuman animals, might work just as well for humans. In a recent example of the genre, an anthropological study among the Runa people of Ecuador, Eduardo Kohn elaborates a complex semiotic theory of environmental perception without once mentioning the idea of affordances or referring to the ecological approach (Kohn, 2013). It is in representing the world, Kohn insists, that animate life distinguishes itself from the residue of inanimate matter. Yet he is also convinced that signs connote the absence of that to which they refer: “all kinds of signs in some way or other re-present what is not present” (Kohn, 2013: 23). But how can a creature possibly remain alive if the real world continually escapes from it? All living organisms need to eat and breathe: but none can breathe absent air or eat absent food. These metabolic processes are fundamental to life. Indeed, if anything distinguishes life from non-life, it is not representation and interpretation but the coupling of action and perception. The challenge for the living organism is not to represent the world in its absence but to participate from within in the world’s very coming into presence. 

# **6.4  A World Without Objects** 

It is high time, I believe, to forge a vocabulary that will allow us to restore the world to presence. We cannot do so, however, without facing up to a deep-seated imbalance in Gibson’s own approach to perception. For a while, on the one hand, he brings the perceiver back to life, as a being who is continually moving around, actively attending to things, exploring their inexhaustible potentials, and becoming ever more skilled in the process; on the other hand, the environment is effectively solidified: it is portrayed as an environment of _objects_ , every one of which is fixed in a rigid and invariant form, rendered inert, ready and waiting for the perceiver to come on the scene and to discover what it affords. That’s why, after having long considered myself an advocate of the theory of affordances, I have latterly become a critic. For perception, as I would now understand it, is not just a matter of 

> 6 In his last collection of essays, semiotician Thomas Sebeok declared the “two cardinal and reciprocal axioms of semiotics” to be that “all life is semiosis,” and that “semiosis presupposes life” (Sebeok, 2001: 10). 

57 

6 Anthropological Affordances 

exploring a world of objects that are already there, or that have—so to speak— “precipitated out” from the formative processes that have given rise to them; it must also be about being present and aware in the very moment of formation itself. This is to join with a “world without objects,” on the crest of its incipience (Ingold, 2015: 13–17). 

There is a beautiful passage in _The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception_ in which Gibson describes the make-up of the environment. It consists, he says, “of the earth and the sky with objects _on_ the earth and _in_ the sky, of mountains and clouds, fires and sunsets, pebbles and stars” (1979: 66). Do mountains, fires, and pebbles, then, rest upon the earth? Do clouds, sunsets, and stars hang in the sky? Gibson would have it so. He imagines an environment cluttered with objects, much like the room of a house is cluttered with furniture. This cluttering, he contends, renders it habitable (1979: 78). Just as removing all the furniture from the room leaves a bare floor, so a world without objects could only be a barren plain, absolutely flat, stretching in all directions to the circle of the horizon. Such, according to Gibson, is the ground. As the “reference surface for all other surfaces” (1979: 33), the ground provides a solid base upon which is mounted everything that might figure as an object of perception, barring those celestial bodies whose abode is in the sky. This applies, moreover, not only to the city, with its buildings and streets, but also to the countryside with its fields and forests, rocky outcrops and pebble-strewn streams. 

Gibson’s default assumption, in a word, is that the terrestrial environment is _built_ . It is as if we were presented not with the world itself but with its full-scale reconstruction, all laid out in advance. But the real world is not like that. Mountains, for example, do not stand erect upon the ground but are formations of the ground itself, continually shaped as the earth’s rising, driven by tectonic forces, meets the sky’s falling in the erosive effects of wind and weather. In this world, unlike in its reconstruction, fires burn and pebbles grate; clouds billow as moisture-laden folds of crumpled air and glow in the light of the setting sun; stars shine as pin-pricks of light in the night sky. All are phenomena of an environment that is not already built—already populated with objects—but ever in formation. Even in the city, buildings do not really stand upon the surface of the earth but are sunk into it, in their foundations, while above ground they contend with the atmospheric elements. Like trees, with their roots, branches, and canopies, buildings are no more _on_ the earth than they are _in_ the sky; they are rather simultaneously earthly and celestial. Indeed, it is only because they are _of_ the earth that they are also _of_ the sky (Ingold, 2022: 157). 

A habitable ground, then, is not a hard surface furnished with objects, as Gibson thought. It is rather a surface that is soft and permeable, allowing the elements of earth, air, and moisture, powered by the fire of the sun, to mix and mingle, creating thereby the conditions for living things to flourish (Ingold, 2011: 120–1). The primary condition of life is not solidity but flux. And for perceivers, immersed in the flux, the world is evidently not always ready and waiting. They have also to be ready and waiting for the world, attending to it in the sense of abiding with it and doing its bidding. There are thus two sides to attention. One side—with which Gibson is primarily concerned—has to do with perceptual _attunement_ to the affordances of 

58 

T. Ingold 

the environment. That’s when the world waits for you. The other side, of your waiting for the world, is a matter of _exposure_ . Literally, to be exposed means being pulled out of position.<sup>7</sup> In this displaced condition, the sense of understanding—of having solid ground beneath your feet—is shaken, leaving you vulnerable and hyper-alert, wide-eyed in astonishment rather than narrowly focused on a target. This is not so much an under _standing_ as an under _going_ , which strips away the veneer of certainty wherein we find comfort and security, and opens to pure possibility. 

# **6.5  Between Anticipation and Perception** 

To rebalance the theory of perception, we have to give equal weight to the two sides of attention, of exposure and attunement, of waiting on a worlding world and tuning in to a world-in-waiting. What, then, is the relation between them? There’s no doubt that to embark on any activity, be it to hunt and fish, to farm, to set sail, indeed to carry on almost any kind of livelihood on land or at sea, means putting one’s existence on the line. The safe course would be to stay put. To live, however, we have to get moving, to push the boat out into the current of a world-in-formation. Thus, all undergoing begins in exposure. But as it proceeds, skills of perception and action, born of practice and experience, begin to kick in. When walking, for example, we place ourselves at risk with every step, falling forward on one foot, tumbling into the void, only to regain our poise, albeit temporarily, as the other foot comes to land on the ground ahead. What commences with the vulnerability of exposure ends in the mastery of attunement, providing in turn the ground from which the walker can once again submit to the hazard of exposure, in an alternation that continues for as long as the walk goes on. 

This alternation, I believe, is fundamental to all life. But it is also unidirectional. That is to say, in real life, _submission leads and mastery follows_ ; never the reverse (Ingold, 2015: 38–42). Where submission casts off into a world in becoming, setting us loose to fall, mastery restores our grip so we can keep going. The first is a moment of _aspiration_ ; the second a moment of _prehension_ . Out in front, an aspirant anticipation feels its way forward, improvising a passage, while bringing up the rear is a prehensile perception already accustomed to the ways of the world and skilled in attending and responding to its affordances. And as submission gives way to mastery, aspiration to prehension, anticipation to perception, and exposure to attunement, there comes a turning point at which a tentative opening matures into a firm sense of direction. The Ancient Greeks had a word for this, namely _kairos_ , denoting not just the moment that must be seized but the attention and responsiveness 

> 7 From the Latin _ex-_ (“out”) plus _-positio_ (“position”). “To open our eyes is to get a look at what is evident,” writes philosopher of education Jan Masschelein; “it is, as I would like to say, about being or becoming attentive, it is to expose oneself” (Masschelein, 2010: 46). 

59 

6 Anthropological Affordances 

necessary to do so.<sup>8</sup> It is the point when the archer, having bent his bow, releases the arrow toward its target, or when the weaver shoots the shuttle through the shed of the loom. The ability to catch this moment, and not to let it pass, is perhaps the greatest part of any craft skill. 

In the foregoing, I have inserted two supplementary terms, namely “aspiration” and “anticipation.” Both call for some explanation. Literally, to aspire is to draw breath. Like breathing in to breathe out, aspiration gathers up the past in order to cast it forward, along a line of attention. Brimming with as yet undirected potential, aspiration _anticipates_ the future, but does not _predict_ it. Far from predetermining the final forms of things, or fixing their ultimate destinations, anticipation opens up a path and improvises a passage.<sup>9</sup> It is, if you will, a seeing into the future rather than the projection of an end state in the present (Ingold, 2013: 69). Thus, where anticipation and aspiration lead (in exposure), perception and prehension follow (in attunement). Might this offer a possible solution to another question often put to me, to which the answer, up to now, has proved elusive? The question is: where, in our thinking about perception, can we find a place for “imagination”? For those of a cognitivist persuasion, of course, this is a non-problem. For them, the percept is an image, a representation, and as such on the other side of the fence from the reality it purports to represent. Thus, to perceive _is_ to imagine. But what if, with Gibson, we suppose that perception opens directly to the real? What happens to imagination then? 

Gibson (1979: 255–6) lists imagining as one of a number of forms of awareness that “are not strictly perceptual”; others include dreaming and wishful thinking. There is, he says, a simple test for telling the perceptual and the non-perceptual apart. Reality is inexhaustible; the more you subject it to scrutiny, the more you will discover. Not so, however, with the image. For try as you might, you will never find in it more than the mind has already placed there.<sup>10</sup> All you can do is add to it, by way of interpretation. Perceiving is to imagining, then, as discovery to interpretation (Ingold, 2022: 32). But do the real and the imaginary have to be thus split apart? Might they rather be unified at the very moment, in the alternation of life, when perception turns to anticipation, and prehension to aspiration? This is to think of imagination not as a power of mental representation, but as a way of living creatively in a world that is not already created, already formed, but is itself crescent, always running ahead of itself. In excess of the crescent world over the objects left in its wake, affordance gives way to pure possibility. To inhabit this world, in perception and imagination, is to participate from within in its self-making, its autopoiesis. And that, to my mind, is the calling of anthropology. 

> 8 For a fuller discussion of _kairos_ , see Hawhee (2004). 

> 9 According to philosopher Jacques Derrida, to anticipate is “to take the initiative, to be out in front, to take ( _capere_ ) in advance ( _ante_ )” (Derrida, 1993: 4). 

> 10 In an essay first published in 1940, Jean-Paul Sartre had made an identical point: “No matter how long I may look at an image, I shall never find anything in it but what I put there.” Herein, he continued, lies the essential difference between an image and a perception, for in the latter “there is always, at each and every moment. Infinitely _more_ than we see” (Sartre, 1972: 7–8). 

60 

T. Ingold 

# **References** 

Derrida, J. (1993). In P.-A. Brault & M. Naas (Eds.), _Memoirs of the blind: The self-portrait and other ruins_ . University of Chicago Press. 

Gibson James, J. (1979). _The ecological approach to visual perception_ . Houghton Mifflin. Hallowell, A. I. (1955). _Culture and experience_ . University of Pennsylvania Press. Hawhee, D. (2004). _Bodily arts: Rhetoric and athletics in ancient Greece_ . University of Texas Press. Ingold, T. (1983). The architect and the bee: Reflections on the work of animals and men. _Man (N.S.), 18_ , 1–20. 

Ingold, T. (1992). Culture and the perception of the environment. In E. Croll & D. Parkin (Eds.), _Bush Base, Forest farm: Culture, environment and development_ (pp. 39–56). Routledge. Ingold, T. (1993). The art of translation in a continuous world. In G. Pálsson (Ed.), _Beyond boundaries: Understanding, translation and anthropological discourse_ (pp. 210–230). Berg. Ingold, T. (2000). _The perception of the environment: Essays on livelihood, dwelling and skill_ . Routledge. 

Ingold, T. (2011). _Being alive: Essays on movement, knowledge and description_ . Routledge. Ingold, T. (2013). _Making: Anthropology, archaeology, art and architecture_ . Routledge. Ingold, T. (2015). _The life of lines_ . Routledge. 

Ingold, T. (2022). _Imagining for real: Essays on creation, attention and correspondence_ . Routledge. Kohn, E. (2013). _How forests think: Toward an anthropology beyond the human_ . University of California Press. 

Masschelein. (2010). E-ducating the gaze: The idea of a poor pedagogy. _Ethics and Education, 5_ (1), 43–53. 

Reed, E. S. (1988). In J. J. Gibson (Ed.), _The psychology of perception_ . Yale University Press. Sahlins, M. (1976). _Culture and practical reason_ . Chicago University Press. Sartre, J.-P. (1972). _The psychology of perception_ . Methuen. Sebeok, T. A. (2001). _Global semiotics_ . Indiana University Press. 

